FLAME: Taming Backdoors in Federated Learning
Thien Duc Nguyen and Phillip Rieger, Technical University of Darmstadt;
Huili Chen, University of California San Diego; Hossein Yalame, Helen Möllering,
and Hossein Fereidooni, Technical University of Darmstadt; Samuel Marchal,
Aalto University and F-Secure; Markus Miettinen, Technical University
of Darmstadt; Azalia Mirhoseini, Google; Shaza Zeitouni, Technical University
of Darmstadt; Farinaz Koushanfar, University of California San Diego;
Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi and Thomas Schneider, Technical University of Darmstadt
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity22/presentation/nguyen

This paper is included in the Proceedings of the
31st USENIX Security Symposium.
August 10–12, 2022 • Boston, MA, USA
978-1-939133-31-1

Open access to the Proceedings of the
31st USENIX Security Symposium is
sponsored by USENIX.

FLAME: Taming Backdoors in Federated Learning
Thien Duc Nguyen1 , Phillip Rieger1 , Huili Chen2 , Hossein Yalame1 , Helen Möllering1 ,
Hossein Fereidooni1 , Samuel Marchal3 , Markus Miettinen1 , Azalia Mirhoseini4 ,
Shaza Zeitouni1 , Farinaz Koushanfar2 , Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi1 , and Thomas Schneider 1
1 Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany∗
; 2 University of California San Diego, USA; 3 Aalto
University and F-Secure, Finland; 4 Google, USA

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a collaborative machine learning
approach allowing participants to jointly train a model without having to share their private, potentially sensitive local
datasets with others. Despite its benefits, FL is vulnerable to
so-called backdoor attacks, in which an adversary injects manipulated model updates into the federated model aggregation
process so that the resulting model will provide targeted false
predictions for specific adversary-chosen inputs. Proposed
defenses against backdoor attacks based on detecting and
filtering out malicious model updates consider only very specific and limited attacker models, whereas defenses based on
differential privacy-inspired noise injection significantly deteriorate the benign performance of the aggregated model. To
address these deficiencies, we introduce FLAME, a defense
framework that estimates the sufficient amount of noise to be
injected to ensure the elimination of backdoors. To minimize
the required amount of noise, FLAME uses a model clustering and weight clipping approach. This ensures that FLAME
can maintain the benign performance of the aggregated model
while effectively eliminating adversarial backdoors. Our evaluation of FLAME on several datasets stemming from application areas including image classification, word prediction,
and IoT intrusion detection demonstrates that FLAME removes backdoors effectively with a negligible impact on the
benign performance of the models.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is an emerging collaborative machine
learning trend with many applications, such as next word
prediction for mobile keyboards [39], medical imaging [49],
and intrusion detection for IoT [44] to name a few. In FL,
clients locally train models based on local training data and
then provide these model updates to a central aggregator who
combines them into a global model. The global model is then
propagated back to the clients for the next training iteration.
∗ Emails: {ducthien.nguyen, ahmad.sadeghi}@trust.tu-darmstadt.de

USENIX Association

FL promises efficiency and scalability as the training is
distributed among many clients and executed in parallel.
In particular, FL improves privacy by enabling clients to
keep their training data locally [38]. Despite its benefits,
FL has been shown to be vulnerable to so-called poisoning
attacks where the adversary manipulates the local models
of a subset of clients participating in the federation so that
the malicious updates get aggregated into the global model.
Untargeted poisoning attacks merely aim at deteriorating
the performance of the global model and can be defeated by
validating the performance of uploaded models [12]. In this
paper, we therefore focus on the more challenging problem
of backdoor attacks [7, 45, 57, 59], i.e., targeted poisoning
attacks in which the adversary seeks to stealthily manipulate
the resulting global model in a way that attacker-controlled
inputs result in incorrect predictions chosen by the adversary.
Deficiencies of existing defenses. Existing defenses against
backdoor attacks can be roughly divided into two categories: The first one comprises anomaly detection-based approaches [4,9,22,51] for identifying and removing potentially
poisoned model updates. However, these solutions are effective only under very specific adversary models, as they make
detailed assumptions about the attack strategy of the adversary
and/or the underlying distribution of the benign or adversarial
datasets. If these very specific assumptions do not hold, the
defenses may fail. The second category is inspired by differential privacy (DP) techniques [7,56], where individual weights1
of model updates are clipped to a maximum threshold and
random noise is added to the weights for diluting/reducing
the impact of potentially poisoned model updates on the aggregated global model. In contrast to the first category, DP
techniques [7, 56] are applicable in a generic adversary model
without specific assumptions about adversarial behavior and
data distributions and are effective in eliminating the impact
of malicious model updates. However, straightforward application of DP approaches severely deteriorates the benign
1 Parameters of neural network models typically consist of ’weights’ and
’biases’. For the purposes of this paper, however, these parameters can be
treated identically and we will refer to them as ’weights’ for brevity.

31st USENIX Security Symposium

1415

performance of the aggregated model because the amount of
noise required to ensure effective elimination of backdoors
also results in significant modifications of individual weights
of benign model updates [7, 57].
In this paper, we develop a resilient defense against backdoors by combining the benefits of both defense types without
suffering from the limitations (narrow attacker model, assumptions about data distributions) and drawbacks (loss of benign
performance) of existing approaches. To this end, we introduce an approach in which detection of anomalous model
updates and tuned clipping of weights are combined to minimize the amount of noise needed for backdoor removal of the
aggregated model while preserving its benign performance.
Our Goals and Contributions. We present FLAME, a resilient aggregation framework for FL that eliminates the impact of backdoor attacks while maintaining the benign performance of the aggregated model. This is achieved by three
modules: DP-based noising of model updates to remove backdoor contributions, automated model clustering approach to
identify and eliminate potentially poisoned model updates,
and model weight clipping before aggregation to limit the
impact of malicious model updates on the aggregation result.
The last two modules can significantly reduce the amount of
random noise required by DP noising for backdoor elimination. In particular, our contributions are as follows:
• We present FLAME, a defense framework against backdoor attacks in FL that is capable of eliminating backdoors without impacting the benign performance of the
aggregated model. Contrary to earlier backdoor defenses,
FLAME is applicable in a generic adversary model, i.e.,
it does not rely on strong assumptions about the attack
strategy of the adversary, nor about the underlying data
distributions of benign and adversarial datasets (§4.1).
• We show that the amount of required Gaussian noise
can be radically reduced by: a) applying our clustering
approach to remove potentially malicious model updates
and b) clipping the weights of local models at a proper
level to constrain the impact of individual (especially
malicious) models on the aggregated model. (§4.3)
• We provide a noise boundary proof for the amount of
Gaussian noise required by noise injection (inspired by
DP) to eliminate backdoor contributions (§5).
• We extensively evaluate our defense framework on realworld datasets from three very different application areas.
We show that FLAME reduces the amount of required
noise so that the benign performance of the aggregated
model does not degrade significantly, providing a crucial
advantage over state-of-the-art defenses using straightforward injection of DP-based noise (§7).
As an orthogonal aspect, we also consider how the privacy of
model updates against an honest-but-curious aggregator can
be preserved and develop a secure multi-party computation

1416

31st USENIX Security Symposium

approach that can preserve the privacy of individual model
updates while realizing our backdoor defense approach (§8).

2 Background and Problem Setting
2.1 Federated Learning
Federated Learning [38, 50] is a concept for distributed machine learning that links n clients and an aggregator to collaboratively build a global model G. In a training iteration
t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, each client i ∈ {1, . . . , n} locally trains a local
model Wi with p parameters (indicating both weights and
p
biases) w1i , . . . , wi based on the previous global model Gt−1
using its local data Di and sends it to the aggregator which
aggregates the received models Wi into the global model Gt .
Several aggregation mechanisms have been proposed recently: 1) Federated Averaging (FedAvg) [38], 2) Krum [9],
3) Adaptive Federated Averaging [42], and 4) Trimmed mean
or median [60]. Although we evaluate FLAME’s effectiveness on several aggregation mechanisms in §7.1, we generally
focus on FedAvg in this work as it is commonly applied
in FL [21, 28, 39, 44, 47, 50, 54] and related work on backdoor attacks [7, 22, 51, 57, 59]. In FedAvg, the global model
is updated by averaging the weighted models as follows:
Gt = Σni=1 si ×Wi/s, where si = ∥Di ∥, s = Σni=1 si . However, in
practice, a malicious client might provide falsified information about its dataset size (i.e., a large number) to amplify
the relative weight of its updates [57]. Previous works often
employed equal weights (si = 1/n) for the contributions of all
clients [7, 51, 59]. We adopt this approach in this paper, i.e.,
we set Gt = Σni=1Wi/n. Further, other state-of-the-art aggregation rules, e.g., Krum [9], Adaptive Federated Averaging [42],
and Trimmed mean or median [60] also do not consider the
sizes of local training datasets by design.

2.2

Backdoor Attacks on Federated Learning

In backdoor attacks, the adversary A manipulates the local
models Wi of k compromised clients to obtain poisoned models Wi′ that are then aggregated into the global model Gt and
thus affect its properties. In particular, A wants the poisoned
model Gt′ to behave normally on all inputs except for specific attacker-chosen inputs x ∈ IA (where IA denotes the
so-called trigger set) for which attacker-chosen (incorrect)
predictions should be output. Figure 1 shows common techniques used in FL backdoor attacks, including 1) data poisoning, e.g., [45,51,59], where A manipulates training datasets of
models, and 2) model poisoning, e.g., [7, 57] where A manipulates the training process or the trained models themselves.
Next, we will briefly discuss these attack techniques.
Data Poisoning. In this attack, A adds manipulated data
DA to the training datasets of compromised clients i by flipping data labels, e.g., by changing the labels of a street sign
database so that pictures showing a 30 km/h speed limit
are labeled as 80 km/h [51], or, by adding triggers into data
samples (e.g., a specific pixel pattern added to images [59])
in combination with label flipping. We denote the fraction

USENIX Association

Benign clients

𝐷𝑗
𝐺𝑡−1

SGW
SGW
SGW
Train

𝑊𝑗
Federated
Averaging

Compromised clients
SGW
SGW
Train

𝐷𝑖′

Data poisoning

𝐺𝑡

𝑊𝑖′

Constraining Scaling
Model poisoning

Figure 1: An overview of backdoor attacks.
of injected poisoned data DA
i in the overall poisoned training dataset D′i of client i as Poisoned Data Rate (PDR), i.e.,
PDRi = |DAi |/|D′i |.
Model Poisoning. This attack technique requires that A can
fully control a number of clients. A poisons the training
datasets of these clients and manipulates how they execute
the training process by modifying parameters and scaling
the resulting model update to maximize the attack impact
while evading the aggregator’s anomaly detector [7, 57]. This
is done by (1) scaling up the weights of malicious model
updates to maximize attack impact (e.g., model-replacement
attack [7], or, projected gradient descent (PGD) attack with
model replacement [57]), or, scaling down model updates to
make them harder to detect (e.g., train-and-scale [7] ) and
(2) constraining the training process itself to minimize the
deviation of malicious models from benign models to evade
anomaly detection (e.g., constrain-and-scale attack [7]).

2.3

Adversary Goals and Capabilities

The goals of the adversary are two-fold:
Impact: The adversary A aims to manipulate the global
model G so that the modified model G′ provides incorrect predictions f (G′ , x) = c′ ̸= f (G, x) for any inputs x ∈ IA , where
IA is the so-called trigger set consisting of specific attackerchosen inputs and c′ denotes the incorrect prediction chosen
by the adversary.
Stealthiness: To make the poisoned model G′ hard to detect
by aggregator A, it should closely mimic the behavior of G
on all other inputs not in IA , i.e.:
 ′
c ̸= f (G, x) ∀x ∈ IA
f (G′ , x) =
(1)
f (G, x)
∀x ∈
/ IA
Additionally, to make poisoned models as indistinguishable
as possible from benign models, the distance (e.g., euclidean)
between a poisoned model W ′ and a benign model W must be
smaller than a threshold η denoting the distinction capability
of the anomaly detector of aggregator A, i.e., dist(W,W ′ ) < η.
The adversary can estimate this distance by comparing the
local malicious model to the global model or to a local model
trained on benign data.
Adversarial Capabilities. In this paper, we make no specific assumptions about the adversary’s behavior. We assume

USENIX Association

that the adversary A has full control over k < n2 clients and
their training data, processes, and parameters [7, 59]. We denote the fraction of compromised clients as Poisoned Model
Rate PMR = nk . Furthermore, A has full knowledge of the
aggregator’s operations, including potentially applied backdoor defenses. However, A has no control over any processes
executed at the aggregator nor over the honest clients.

2.4

Preliminaries

HDBSCAN [11] is a density-based clustering algorithm
that uses the distance of data points in n-dimensional space
to group data points that are located near each other together
into a cluster. Hereby the number of clusters is determined
dynamically. Data points that do not fit to any cluster are
considered outliers. However, while HDBSCAN’s predecessor DBSCAN [19] uses a predefined maximal distance to
determine whether two points belong to the same cluster,
HDBSCAN determines this maximal distance for each cluster independently, based on the density of points. Thus, in
HDBSCAN, neither the maximal distance nor the total number of clusters need to be predefined.
Differential Privacy (DP). DP is a privacy technique that
aims to ensure that the outputs do not reveal individual data
records of participants. DP is formally defined as follows:
Definition 1 ((ε, δ)-differential privacy). A randomized algorithm M is (ε, δ)-differentially private if for any datasets
D1 and D2 that differ on a single element, and any subset of
outputs S ∈ Range(M ), the following inequality holds:
Pr[M (D1 ) ∈ S ] ≤ eε · Pr[M (D2 ) ∈ S ] + δ.
Here, ε denotes the privacy bound and δ denotes the probability of breaking this bound [18]. Smaller values of ε and
δ indicate stronger privacy. A commonly used approach to
enforce differential privacy is adding random Gaussian noise
N(0, σ2 ) to the output of the algorithm [3, 18].

3

Problem Setting and Objectives

Backdoor Characterization. Following common practice
in FL-related papers (e.g., [7, 12, 22]), we represent Neural
Networks (NNs) using their weight vectors, in which the
extraction of weights is done identically for all models by
flattening/serializing the weight/bias matrices in a predetermined order. Figure 2 shows an abstract two-dimensional
representation of the weight vectors of local models compared to the global model Gt−1 of the preceding aggregation
round. Each model Wi can be characterized with two factors:
direction (angle) and magnitude (length) of its weight vector
(w1 , w2 , . . . , w p ). The angle between two updates Wi and W j
can be measured, e.g., by using the cosine distance metric ci j
as defined in (2) while their magnitude difference is measured
by the L2 -norm ei j as defined in (3).
p
∑k=1 wki wkj
WiW j
ci j = 1 −
= 1− q
(2)
q
p
p
∥Wi ∥ W j
∑k=1 (wki )2 ∑k=1 (wkj )2

31st USENIX Security Symposium

1417

−
→
W1′

- Benign models
- Backdoored models
- Deviations of
Backdoored models
−
→
W2′

−
→ −−→
W1′ − Gt−1

must be preserved to maintain its utility. (iii) Independence
from data distributions and attack strategies: The defense
method must be applicable to generic adversary models, i.e.,
it must not require prior knowledge about the backdoor attack
method, or make assumptions about specific data distributions
of local clients, e.g., whether the data are iid or non-iid.

−
→
W3′

−
→ −−→
W2′ − Gt−1
−
→′ −−→
−−→ W3 − Gt−1
Gt−1

Figure 2: Weight vectors of benign and backdoored models.
s
ei j = Wi −W j =

p

2

∑ (wki − wkj )

(3)

k=1

Benign and backdoored local models are shown in blue and
red colors and are labeled with Wi or Wi′ , respectively. Note
that the benign models are typically not identical due to the
potentially partially non-iid nature of their training data.
The impact of the adversarial goal (injection of a backdoor)
causes a deviation in the model parameters that manifests
itself as a difference in the direction and/or magnitude of the
backdoored model’s weight vector in comparison to benign
models, e.g., the deviations among local models and to the
global model Gt−1 of the previous aggregation round. Since
the adversary has full control over the training process of
compromised clients, he can fully control these distances, e.g.,
by changing the direction (in the case of W1′ ) or magnitude
(in the case of W2′ ) of the backdoored models’ weight vectors.
Figure 2 also shows three kinds of backdoored models resulting from different types of backdoor attacks. The first type
W1′ has a similar weight vector, but a large angular deviation
from the majority of local models and the global model. This
is because such models are trained to obtain high accuracy
on the backdoor task, which can be achieved by using a large
poisoned data rate (PDR) or a large number of local training
epochs (cf. Distributed Backdoor Attack (DBA) [59]). The
second backdoor type W2′ has a small angular deviation but
a large magnitude to amplify the impact of the attack. Such
models can be crafted by the adversary by scaling up the
model weights to boost its effect on the global model (cf.
Model-replacement attack in [7]). The third backdoor type
W3′ has a similar weight vector as benign models, the angular
difference and the magnitude are not substantially different
compared to benign models and, thus less distinguishable
from benign models. Such stealthy backdoored models can
be crafted by the adversary by carefully constraining the training process or scaling down the poisoned model’s weights (cf.
Constrain-and-scale attack [7] or FLIoT attack [45]).
Defense Objectives. A generic defense that can effectively
mitigate backdoor attacks in the FL setting needs to fulfill
the following objectives: (i) Effectiveness: To prevent the
adversary from achieving its attack goals, the impact of backdoored model updates must be eliminated so that the aggregated global model does not demonstrate backdoor behavior.
(ii) Performance: Benign performance of the global model

1418

31st USENIX Security Symposium

4

FLAME Overview and Design

We present the high-level idea of FLAME and the associated
design challenges to fulfill the objectives identified in §3.

4.1

High-level Idea

Motivation. Earlier works (e.g., Sun et al. [56]) use differential privacy-inspired noising of the aggregated model for eliminating backdoors. They determine the sufficient amount of
noise to be used empirically. In the FL setting this is, however,
challenging, as one cannot in general assume the aggregator to
have access to training data, in particular to poisoned datasets.
What is therefore needed is a generic method for determining
how much noise is sufficient to remove backdoors effectively.
On the other hand, the more noise is injected into the model,
the more its benign performance will be impacted.
FLAME Overview. FLAME estimates the noise level required for backdoor removal in the FL setting without extensive empirical evaluation and having access to training data
(this noise bound is formally proven in §5). In addition, to
effectively limit the amount of required noise, FLAME uses a
novel clustering-based approach to identify and remove adversarial model updates with high impact and applies a dynamic
weight-clipping approach to limit the impact of models that
the adversary has scaled up to boost their performance. As
discussed in §3, one cannot guarantee that all backdoored
models can be detected since the adversary can fully control
both the angular and magnitude deviation to make the models
arbitrarily hard to detect. Our clustering approach therefore
aims to remove models with high attack impact (having larger
angular deviation) rather than all malicious models. Fig. 3
illustrates the high-level idea of FLAME consisting of the
above three components: filtering, clipping, and noising. We
emphasize, however, that each of these components needs
to be applied with great care, since, a naïve combination of
noising with clustering and clipping leads to poor results as
it easily fails to mitigate the backdoor and/or deteriorates the
benign performance of the model, as we show in §C. We detail the design of each component and its use in the FLAME
defense approach in §4.3.

4.2

Design Challenges

To realize the high-level idea presented above, we need to
solve the following technical challenges.
C1 - Filtering out backdoored models with large angular
deviations in dynamic scenarios. As discussed in §3, the
weight vector of a well-trained backdoored model, W ′ , has a
higher angular difference in comparison to weight vectors of
benign models W . FLAME deploys a clustering approach to

USENIX Association

1 Filtering

−
→
W1′

- Benign models
- Backdoored models

Clipping bound S

2 Clipping

−
→
W2′

−
→
W3′
−−→
Gt−1

(a) Applying clustering and clipping.
σ: Noise level

S
−
→
Gt
−−→
Gt−1

3 Noising
σ

−
→
Gt
−−→
Gt−1

(b) Applying noising

Figure 3: High-level idea of FLAME defense.
identify such poisoned models and remove them from FL aggregation (detailed in §4.3.1). The effect of clustering-based
filtering is shown in Fig. 3a where model W1′ is removed from
the aggregated model as it does not align with the directions
of benign models. In contrast to existing clustering-based defenses, we need an approach that can also work in a dynamic
attack setting, i.e., the number of injected backdoors is unknown and may vary between training rounds. To this end, we
make a key observation: clustering approaches using a fixed
number of clusters ncluster for identifying malicious models
are inherently vulnerable to attacks with varying numbers of
backdoors2 nbackdoor . This is because the adversary can likely
cause at least one backdoor model to be clustered together
with benign models due to the pigeonhole principle by simultaneously injecting nbackdoor ≥ ncluster backdoors. We seek
to solve this challenge by employing a clustering solution
that dynamically determines the clusters for model updates,
thereby allowing it to adapt to dynamic attacks.
C2 -Limiting the impact of scaled-up backdoors. To limit
the impact of backdoored models that the adversary artificially
scales up to boost the attack (e.g., W2′ in Fig. 2), the weight
vectors of models with high magnitudes can be clipped [56].
The effect of clipping is shown in Fig. 3a where the weight
vectors of all models with a magnitude beyond the clipping
bound S (in particular, backdoored model W2′ ) are clipped to
S by scaling down the weight vectors. The resulting clipped
weight vectors are shown on the left side of Fig. 3b. The
challenge here is how to select a proper clipping bound without empirically evaluating its impact on the training datasets
(which are not available in the FL setting). If the applied clipping bound is too large, an adversary can boost its model W ′
by scaling its weights up to the clipping bound, thereby maximizing the backdoor impact on the aggregated global model
G. However, if the applied clipping bound is too small, a large
fraction of benign model updates W will be clipped, thereby
leading to performance deterioration of the aggregated global
2 We consider two backdoors to be independent if they use different

triggers.

USENIX Association

model G on the main task. We tackle this challenge in §4.3.2,
where we show how to select a clipping bound that can not
be influenced by the adversary and that effectively limits the
impact of scaled-up backdoored models.
C3 -Selecting suitable noise level for backdoor elimination.
As mentioned in §4.1, FLAME uses model noising that applies Gaussian noise with noise level σ to mitigate the adversarial impact of backdoored models (e.g., W3′ in Fig. 2).
Similar to the clipping bound, however, also here the noise
level σ must be carefully selected, as it has a direct impact on
the effectiveness of the defense and the model’s benign performance. If it is too low, the aggregated model might retain
backdoor behavior after model noising, rendering the defense
ineffective, while excessive noise will degrade the utility of
the aggregated model. To address this challenge, we develop
an approach for reliably estimating a sufficient but minimal
bound for the applied noise in §5.

4.3

FLAME Design

As discussed in §4.1, our defense consists of three main components: filtering, clipping, and noising. Figure 4 shows these
components and the workflow of FLAME during training
round t. Algorithm 1 outlines the procedure of FLAME. In
the rest of this section, we detail the design of these components to resolve the challenges in §4.2.
Algorithm 1 FLAME
Input: n, G0 , T ▷ n is the number of clients, G0 is the initial
global model, T is the number of training iterations
∗
∗
2: Output: G ▷ G is the updated global model after T iterations
T
T
3: for each training iteration t in [1, T ] do
4:
for each client i in [1, n] do
∗ )
5:
Wi ← C LIENT U PDATE(Gt−1
▷ The aggregator
∗
∗ using its data D locally
sends Gt−1 to Client i who trains Gt−1
i
to achieve local modal Wi and sends Wi back to the aggregator.
6:
(c11 , . . . , cnn ) ← C OSINE D ISTANCE(W1 , . . . ,Wn )
▷
∀i, j ∈ (1, . . . , n), ci j is the cosine distance between Wi and W j
7:
(b1 , . . . , bL ) ← C LUSTERING(c11 , . . . , cnn )
▷ L is the
number of admitted models, bl is the index of the l th model
8:
(e1 , . . . , en )
←
E UCLIDEAN D IS ∗ , (W , . . . ,W ))
TANCES(Gt−1
▷ ei is the Euclidean distance
n
1
∗ and W
between Gt−1
i
9:
St ← M EDIAN(e1 , . . . , en )
▷ St is the adaptive clipping
bound at round t
10:
for each client l in [1, L] do
11:
Wbcl ← Gt−1 + (Wbl − Gt−1 ) · M IN(1, γ)
▷ Where γ
(= St /ebl ) is the clipping parameter, Wbcl is the admitted model
after clipped by the adaptive clipping bound St
12:
Gt ← ∑Ll=1 Wbcl /L
▷ Aggregating, Gt is the plain global
model before adding noise q
1:

13:

σ ← λ · St where λ = 1ε ·

14:

Gt∗ ← Gt + N(0, σ2 )

2ln 1.25
▷ Adaptive noising level
δ
▷ Adaptive noising

4.3.1 Dynamic Model Filtering
The Model Filtering component of FLAME utilizes a dynamic clustering technique based on HDBSCAN [11] that

31st USENIX Security Symposium

1419

Random

𝐺
Adaptive Clipping 𝑡 Adaptive Noising
Admitted local models 𝑊𝑏1 , … , 𝑊𝑏𝐿
Dynamic Clustering

𝑊1
Client 1

𝑊𝑖
Client i

Aggregator

Aggregated global model 𝐺𝑡∗

(a) Ground truth
Cluster C

∗
Global model 𝐺𝑡−1

To overcome the limitations of existing defenses, we design our clustering solution and ensure that: (i) it is able to
handle dynamic attack scenarios where multiple backdoors
are injected simultaneously, and (ii) it minimizes false positives of poisoned model identification. In contrast to existing
approaches that try to place poisoned models into one cluster,
our approach considers each poisoned model individually as
an outlier, so that it can gracefully handle multiple simultaneous backdoors and thus address challenge C1 .
FLAME uses pairwise cosine distances to measure the
angular differences between all model updates and applies the
HDBSCAN clustering algorithm [11]. The advantage here is
that cosine distances are not affected even if the adversary
scales up model updates to boost their impact as this does not
change the angle between the updates’ weight vectors. Since
the HDBSCAN algorithm clusters the models based on their
density of the cosine distance distribution and dynamically
determines the required number of clusters, we leverage it for

1420

31st USENIX Security Symposium

Rejected

Benign

𝑊𝑛
Client 𝑛

Figure 4: Illustration of FLAME’s workflow in round t.
identifies poisoned models with high angular deviations
from the majority of updates (e.g., W1′ in Fig. 3a). Existing
clustering-based defenses [9, 51] identify potentially malicious model updates by clustering them into two groups where
the smaller group is always considered malicious and thus
removed. However, if no malicious models are present in the
aggregation, this approach may lead to many models being
incorrectly removed and thus a reduced accuracy of the aggregated model. These approaches also do not protect against
attacks in which adversary A simultaneously injects multiple backdoors by using different groups of clients to inject
different backdoors. If the number of clusters is fixed, there
is the risk that poisoned and benign models end up in the
same cluster, in particular, if models with different backdoors
differ significantly. Consequently, existing model clustering
methods do not adequately address challenge C1 (§4.2). Fig. 5
shows the behavior of different clustering methods on a set of
model updates’ weight vectors. Fig. 5a shows the ground truth
of an attack scenario where A uses two groups of clients: one
group is used to inject a backdoor, whereas the other group
provides random models with the goal of fooling clusteringbased defenses. Fig. 5b shows how in this setting, K-means
(as used in Auror [51]) fails to successfully separate benign
and poisoned models as all poisoned models end up in the
same cluster with the benign models.

Backdoored

Cluster B

Accepted

(b) K-means
Rejected (Outliers)

Accepted

Cluster A

(c) HDBSCAN

(d) FLAME

Figure 5: Comparison of clustering quality for (a) ground truth, (b)
using K-means with 2 clusters as in Auror [51], (c) straightforward
applied HDBSCAN and (d) our approach as in FLAME.

our dynamic clustering approach. We describe HDBSCAN
and how we apply it in detail in §E. In particular, HDBSCAN
labels models as outliers if they do not fit into any cluster.
This allows FLAME to effectively handle multiple poisoned
models with different backdoors by labeling them as outliers.
To realize this, we set the minimum cluster size to be at least
50% of the clients, i.e., n2 + 1, so that the resulting cluster
will contain the majority of updates (which we assume to
be benign, cf. §2.3). All remaining (potentially poisoned)
models are marked as outliers. This behavior is depicted in
Fig. 5d where all the models from Clusters B and C from
Fig. 5c are considered as outliers. Hence, to the best of our
knowledge, our approach is the first FL backdoor defense that
is able to gracefully handle also dynamic attacks in which the
number of injected backdoors may vary. The clustering step
is shown in lines 6-7 of Alg. 1 where L models are retained
after clustering.
4.3.2

Adaptive Clipping and Noising

As discussed in §4.2 (challenges C2 and C3 ), determining
a proper clipping bound and noise level for model weight
clipping and noising is not straightforward. We present our
new approach for selecting an effective clipping bound and
reliably estimating a sufficient noise level that can effectively
eliminate backdoors while preserving the performance of the
main task. Furthermore, our defense approach is resilient to
adversaries that dynamically adapt their attacks.
Adaptive Clipping. Fig. 6 shows the variation of the average
L2 -norms of model updates of benign clients in three different datasets (cf. §6) over subsequent training rounds. We can
observe that the L2 -norms of benign model updates become
smaller in later training rounds. To effectively remove backdoors while minimizing the impact on benign updates, the
clipping bound S needs to be dynamically adapted to this
decreasing trend of the L2 -norm. Recall that clipping is performed after clustering by scaling down model weights so that
the L2 -norm of the scaled model becomes smaller or equal
to the clipping threshold. We describe how FLAME determines a proper scaling factor for each model update Wi in
t th training round as follows: Given the index set (b1 , . . . bL )
of the models admitted by the clustering method (line 7 of

USENIX Association

that backdoor contributions are effectively eliminated from
the aggregated model. In particular, we show in §5.1 how
the noise-based backdoor elimination technique can be transferred from a centralized to a federated setting by analysing
the relationship between aggregated Gaussian noise applied to
the global model and individual noising of each local model.
Figure 6: L2 -norms of model updates depending on the number of training rounds for different datasets.
Alg. 1), the aggregator first computes the clipping bound
St as the median of the L2 -norms of all n model updates:
St = M EDIAN(e1 , . . . , en ). It should be noted that for determining the clipping bound, the rejected models are also considered to ensure that even if benign models were filtered,
the computed median St is still determined based on benign
values. However, after determining the clipping bound, only
the admitted models W1 , . . . ,WL are considered for later processing. The scaling factor for the l th admitted model is computed as γ = eSbt where ebl is the L2 -norm of the model upl
date Wbl . Clipping scales down model updates as follows:
Wbcl = Gt−1 + (Wbl − Gt−1 ) · M IN(1, γ) (detailed in line 8-11
of Alg. 1) where the multiplication is computed coordinatewise. It is worth noting that weighting contributions (i.e.,
adjusting scaling factor) based on client data sizes is insecure.
As we point out in §2.1, the reported dataset sizes by clients
cannot be trusted, i.e., the adversary can lie about their dataset
sizes to maximize attack impact [57]. Hence, we follow common practice in literature and weight the contributions of all
clients equally regardless of their dataset size [7, 9, 12, 59]. By
using the median as the clipping bound St , we ensure that St is
always in the range of the L2 -norms between benign models
and the global model since we assume that more than 50% of
clients are benign (cf. §2.3). We evaluate the effectiveness of
the clipping approach in §B.2.
Adaptive Noising. It has been shown that by adding noise
to a model’s weights, the impact of outlier samples can be
effectively mitigated [17]. Noise can also be added to poisoned samples (special cases of outliers) used in backdoor
injection. The more noise is added to the model during the
training process, the less responsive the model will be to the
poisoned samples. Thus, increasing model robustness against
backdoors. Eliminating backdoors utilizing noise addition
is conceptually the same in a centralized or federated setting (e.g., [7, 17]): In both cases, noise is added to the model
weights to smooth out the effect of poisoned data (cf. Eq. 5).
The challenge is to determine as small a noise level as possible
to eliminate backdoors and at the same time not deteriorate
the benign performance of the model. As we discuss in detail
in §5.1, the amount of noise is determined by estimating the
sensitivity based on the differences (distances) among local
models, which can be done without access to training data.
We then add Gaussian noise to the global model Gt to yield
a noised global model Gt∗ as follows: Gt∗ = Gt + N(0, σ2 ),
see Lines 13-14 of Alg. 1 for more details. This ensures

USENIX Association

5
5.1

Security Analysis
Noise Boundary Proof of FLAME

In this section, we provide a proof to corroborate that
FLAME can neutralize backdoors in the FL setting by applying strategical noising with bound analysis on the noise level.
We first formulate the noise boundary guarantee of FLAME
in Theorem 1. Subsequently, we explain related parameters
and prove how the noise level bound for σ can be estimated.
This is done by generalizing theoretical results from previous
works [17,18] to the FL setting. Then, we show how the filtering and clipping component of FLAME helps to effectively
reduce the noise level bound in Theorem 2. We provide a
formal proof for linear models and extend the proof to DNNs
using empirical evaluation. This is because providing formal
proof for DP-based backdoor security for DNN models is still
an open research problem even for centralized settings.
Theorem 1. A (ε, δ)-differentially private model with parameters G and clipping bound St is backdoor-free if random
Gaussian noise is added to the model parameters yielding a
noised version G∗ of the model: G∗ ← G + N(0, σ2G ) where
the noise scale σG is determined by the clippingq
bound St and
a noise level factor λ: σG ← λ · St and λ = 1ε ·

2ln 1.25
δ .

We explore the key observation that an ML model with a
sufficient level of differential privacy is backdoor-free. With
this new definition of backdoor-free models in the DP domain,
the main challenge to defeat backdoors in the FL setting is
to decide a proper noise scale for the global model without
knowledge of the training datasets. Furthermore, we need
to minimize the amount of noise added to the global model
to preserve its performance on the main task. None of the
prior DP-based FL backdoor defense techniques provide a
solution to the noise determination problem [56]. For the first
time, FLAME presents an approach to estimate the proper
noise scale that ensures the global model is backdoor-free.
The noise boundary proof in Theorem 1 consists of two steps:
Step 1 (S1). By introducing the data hiding property of DP
(Def. 1) and its implication as the theoretical guarantee for
backdoor-free models. We also discuss function sensitivity
(Def. 2) which is an important factor for selection of the DP
parameters (ε, δ).
Step 2 (S2). We show how FLAME generalizes backdoor
elimination from centralized setting to federated setting with
theoretical analysis of the noise boundary (Eq. 5 and 6).
FLAME is the first FL defense against backdoors that provides noise level proof with bounded backdoor effectiveness.

31st USENIX Security Symposium

1421

(S1) DP foundations and re-interpretation as Backdoorfree. As discussed in §2.4, by definition, DP makes the difference between data points indistinguishable. FLAME leverages this property of DP for backdoor elimination. In particular, we can consider D1 and D2 in Def. 1 as the benign
and backdoored dataset. The inequality of DP suggests that
algorithm M has a high probability of producing the same
outputs on the benign and the poisoned dataset, meaning that
the backdoor is eliminated. The noise level σ is determined
based on the DP parameters (ε, δ) and the sensitivity of the
function f defined below:
Definition 2 (Sensitivity). Given the function f : D → Rd
where D is the data domain and d is the dimension of the
function output, the sensitivity of the function f is defined as:
∆=

max

D1 , D2 ∈ D

|| f (D1 ) − f (D2 )||2 ,

(4)

where D1 and D2 differs on a single element ||D1 − D2 ||1 = 1.
As shown in Lemma 1 [18], this definition can be extended
to datasets differing by more than one element, i.e., can be
generalized to the DP in the multiple-point-difference setting.
(S2) Generalizing backdoor resilience from centralized to
federated setting (FLAME). In the centralized setting, the
defender has access to the model to be protected, the benign
dataset, and the outlier (backdoored) samples. As such, he
can estimate the sensitivity ∆ for (ε, δ)-DP.qWhen applying

Gaussian noise with the noise scale σ = ∆ε 2ln 1.25
δ , the defender can enforce a lower bound on the prediction loss of the
model on the backdoored samples for backdoor elimination
[28]. However, this robustness rationale cannot be directly
transferred from the centralized setting to the FL setting since
the defender in the federated scenario (i.e., aggregator) only
has access to received model updates, but not the datasets to
estimate the sensitivity ∆ for the global model.
FLAME extends DP-based noising for backdoor elimination to the federated setting based on the following observation: if one can ensure that all aggregated models are benign
(i.e., backdoor-free), then it is obvious that the aggregated
global model will also be backdoor-free. This intuition can
be formally proven if the FL aggregation rule is Byzantinetolerant. To ensure that any backdoor potentially present in
the model is eliminated and the aggregated model is benign,
a sufficient DP noise level is added to individual local models. However, since the local models are independent, adding
noise to each local model is mathematically equivalent to
the case where aggregated noise is added to the global model.
This is conceptually equivalent to the conventional centralized
setting, for which it has been formally shown that DP noise
can eliminate backdoors [17]. In the following, we therefore
show that adding DP noise to local models is equivalent to
adding ‘aggregated’ DP noise to the global model.
We write the standard deviation
of noise for the local modq
∆i
els in the form σi ← αiε·ei · 2ln 1.25
δ where αi = ei , ∆i and ei

1422

31st USENIX Security Symposium

is the sensitivity and the L2 norm of the model Wi , respectively.
Mathematically, the FL system with FLAME has:
1
1
G∗ = Σni=1Wi∗ = [ Σni=1 Wi + N(0, σ2i )]
n
n
1 2
1 n
= Σi=1Wi + Σi=1 N(0, σ2i )
n
n
(5)
1 n 2
1 2
= Σi=1Wi + N(0, Σi=1 σi )
n
n
= G + N(0, σ2G )
in which Wi∗ are local models and G∗ the global model after
adding noise N(0, σ2i ). Equation 5 represents the fact that
adding DP noise to each local model (i.e., Wi + N(0, σ2i )) is
equivalent to adding an ‘aggregated’ DP noise on the global
model (i.e., G + N(0, σ2G )). More specifically, this equivalent
Gaussian noise on the global model is the sum of Gaussian noise applied on each local model with a scaling factor
NG = 1n Σni=1 Ni . Here, NG and Ni are random variables with
distribution N(0, σ2G ) and N(0, σ2i ), respectively. As such, we
can compute the equivalent noise scale for the global model:
r
1
1 n 2
1.25 2 1 n 2
2
σG = 2 Σi=1 σi = (
2ln
) · 2 Σi=1 ∆i
n
ε
δ
n
r
1
1.25 2 1 n 2 2
=(
2ln
) · 2 Σi=1 αi ei .
(6)
ε
δ
n
Equation 6 describes the relation between the DP noise added
on FLAME’s global model and the DP noise added on each
local model. This noise scale relation in Eq. 6 together with
the transformation in Eq. 5 enable FLAME to provide guaranteed security for the global model against backdoors, thereby
addressing Challenge C3 .
In Alg. 1, we use the median of Euclidean distances ei as the
upper bound St to clip the admitted local models (line 9-11).
We hypothesize that the sensitivity of a model Wi is positively
correlated with its weight magnitude |Wi | (see Theorem 2
for details). In the case of linear models, the sensitivity ∆
−
has a linear relation with the model weight |→
w | (see Eq. 8).
Therefore, we use the following approximation:
1 n 2 2
1
Σ α e = 2 Σni=1 ∆2i ≈ St2 ,
n2 i=1 i i
n
where St is the weight clipping bound. Having substituted the
above approximation into Eq. 6, we can compute the noise
scale of DP that FLAME deploys on the global model NG :
r
St
1.25
σG ≈
(7)
2ln
ε
δ
This concludes the proof of Theorem 1.
FLAME’s adaptive noising step applies the Gaussian noise
with the noise scale computed in Eq. 7 on the global model
for backdoor elimination as shown in Alg. 1, line 13-14. Note
that FLAME’s noising scheme is adaptive since the clipping
bound St is obtained dynamically in each t th epoch.
Next, we present Theorem 2 and justify how FLAME design reduces the derived noise level with step 3 (S3) below.

USENIX Association

(S3) Clustering and clipping components in FLAME help
to reduce the DP noise boundary. Recall that FLAME protects the FL system against backdoor attacks using three steps:
clustering, clipping, and adding DP noise. The overall workflow of FLAME is shown in Fig. 4. If multiple backdoors
exist in the FL system, the first two steps (clustering and clipping) can remove a subset of backdoors as shown in Fig. 3a.
Note that the remaining backdoors are ‘closer’ to the benign
model updates in terms of both magnitude and direction. This
gives us the intuition that removing the remaining backdoors
by adding DP noise becomes easier (i.e., the noise scale σG
is smaller) after the first two steps of FLAME.
We can see from Theorem 1 that the Gaussian noise scale σ
required for backdoor resilience increases with the sensitivity
of each local model ∆i . We describe two characteristics of the
model parameter W , i.e., direction and magnitude in §4. We
discuss how these two factors impact the sensitivity of the
model defined in Eq. 4 below.
Theorem 2. Backdoor models with large angular deviation
from benign ones, or with large parameter magnitudes have
high sensitivity values ∆.
Proving DP-based backdoor security for DNN models is
still an open problem, even in the centralized setting. We,
therefore, adopt a common approach in literature (e.g., [17])
by providing theoretical proof for linear models and validating
it for DNNs empirically.
Proof : for a linear model f where the function output is
−
determined by the inner product of model weight vector →
w
→
−
and the data vector x , we have
−
−
f (w; x) = →
w ·→
x = |w| · |x| · cosθ,
(8)
→
−
→
−
where θ =< w , x > is the angle between two vectors. In this
case, it is straightforward to see that if the backdoor attack
changes the parameter magnitude |w| or the direction θ of
the model f , the resulting poisoned model f ′ has a large
sensitivity value based on the definition in Eq. 4.
This analysis suggests that backdoor models with large angular deviations or with large weight magnitudes have a high
sensitivity value ∆. Recall that FLAME deploys dynamic
clustering (§4.3.1) to remove poisoned models with large
cosine distances, and employs adaptive clipping (§4.3.2) to
remove poisoned models with large magnitudes. Therefore,
the sensitivity of the remaining backdoor models is lower
compared to the one before applying these two steps. As a result, FLAME can use a small Gaussian noise to eliminate the
remaining backdoors after applying clustering and clipping,
which is beneficial for preserving the main task accuracy.
We empirically show how the noise scale for backdoor
elimination changes after applying each step of FLAME. Particularly, we measure the smallest Gaussian noise scale σ
required to defeat all backdoors (i.e., BA = 0%) in three settings: i) No defense components applied (which is equivalent
to the previous DP-based defense [7, 18]); ii) After applying
dynamic clustering; iii) After applying both dynamic clustering and adaptive clipping (which is the setting of FLAME).

USENIX Association

Table 1: Effect of clustering and clipping in FLAME on
minimal Gaussian noise level σ for backdoor elimination in
the NIDS scenario, in terms of Backdoor Accuracy (BA) and
Main Task Accuracy (MA).
σ
0.01
0.08
0.10

Only
Noising
BA
MA
100.0% 100.0%
3.5%
66.7%
0.0%
54.2%

After
Clustering
BA
MA
0.0% 80.5%
0.0% 66.7%
0.0% 66.1%

After Clustering
& Clipping
BA
MA
0.0%
100.0%
0.0%
100.0%
0.0%
87.6%

We conduct this comparison experiment on the IoT-Traffic
dataset (cf. §6). For each communication round, 100 clients
are selected where k = 40 are adversaries. We remove the
backdoor by adding Gaussian noise N(0, σ2 ) to the aggregated model. Table 1 summarizes the evaluation results in the
above three settings. We can observe from the comparison
results that the noise scale required to eliminate backdoors decreases after individual deployment of clustering and clipping.
This corroborates the correctness of Theorem 2.

5.2 Attack and Data Distribution Assumption
In FLAME, we do not make specific assumptions about
the attack and data distribution compared to the existing
clustering-based defenses. Let X = (X1 , . . . , Xb ) be a set of distributions of benign models (W1 , . . . ,Wn−k ) where b ≤ n − k.
The deviation in X is caused by the diversity of the data. Let
X ′ = (X1′ , . . . , Xa′ ) be a set of distributions of poisoned models (W1′ , . . . ,Wk′ ) where a ≤ k. The deviation in X ′ is caused
by the diversity of the benign data and backdoors (e.g., poisoned data or model crafting). Existing works assume that
Xi′ ≈ X j′ (∀i, j : 1 ≤ i, j ≤ a) (see e.g., [22] or X ′ ̸= X [9,51]).
However, this assumption does not hold in many situations
because (i) there can be one or multiple attackers injecting
multiple backdoors [7], or (ii) the adversary can inject one
or several random (honeypot) models having a distribution
Xr′ that is significantly different from X ∪ (X ′ \ Xr′ ), and (iii)
the adversary can control how much the backdoored models deviate from benign ones as discussed in §3. Therefore,
approaches that purely divide models into two groups, e.g.,
K-means [51] will incorrectly classify models having distribution Xr′ into the malicious group and all remaining models
(having distributions drawn from (X ∪ (X ′ \ Xr′ )) into the benign group. As a result, all backdoored models having distributions drawn from (X ′ \ Xr′ ) are classified as benign, as
demonstrated in Fig. 5b. In contrast, FLAME does not rely
on such specific assumptions (the adversary can arbitrarily
choose X ′ ). If the distribution Xi′ of a poisoned model is similar to benign distributions in X, FLAME will falsely classify
Xi′ as being. But if the distribution X j′ of a poisoned model is
different from the distributions in X, FLAME will identify X j′
as an outlier and classify the associated model as malicious.
To identify deviating and thus potentially malicious models,
FLAME leverages the HDBSCAN algorithm to identify regions of high density in the model space. Any models that are
not located in the dense regions will be categorized as out-

31st USENIX Security Symposium

1423

liers, as shown in Fig. 5d. As discussed in §3, FLAME aims
to remove models with distributions X j′ that have a higher
attack impact compared to models with distribution Xi′ . It is
worth noting, however, that the impact of such remaining backdoored models will be eliminated by the noising component
as shown in §5.1
Striking a balance between accuracy and security: Clustering and DP-based approaches affect model accuracy as
discussed in §4.2 (Challenges C2 and C3 ). In particular, an approach that aims to maximize the number of filtered malicious
models may lead to many false positives, i.e., many benign
models being filtered out. Moreover, applying a very low clipping bound or a very high level of injected noise will degrade
model accuracy. To address these problems, FLAME is configured so that the clustering component removes only models
with high attack impact rather than all malicious models, i.e.,
it aims to remove the first backdoor type W1′ as shown in
Fig. 3. In addition, FLAME carefully estimates the clipping
bound and noise level to ensure backdoor elimination while
preserving model performance. As discussed in §4.3.2, the
L2 -norms of model updates depend on the number of training
rounds, dataset types, and type of backdoors. Consequently,
the clipping threshold and noise level should be adapted to
L2 -norms. We therefore apply the median of the L2 -norms of
model updates as the clipping bound St (cf. Lines 9-11 of Alg.
1). This ensures that St is always computed between a benign
local model and the global model since we assume that more
than 50% of clients are benign (cf. §2.3). Further, estimating
noise level based on St (cf. Lines 13-14 of Alg. 1) also provides a noise boundary that ensures that the global model is
resilient against backdoors as discussed in §5.1. Moreover,
our comparison of potential values for St presented in §B.2
and §B.3 shows that the chosen clipping bound and noise
level provide the best balance between accuracy and security,
i.e., FLAME eliminates backdoor while retaining the global
model’s performance on the main task.

6

Experimental Setup

We conduct all the experiments using the PyTorch deep learning framework [2] and use the source code provided by Bagdasaryan et al. [7], Xie et al. [59] and Wang et al. [57] to
implement the attacks. We reimplemented existing defenses
to compare them with FLAME.
Datasets and Learning Configurations. Following recent
research on poisoning attacks on FL, we evaluate FLAME
in three typical application scenarios: word prediction [35,
38–40], image classification [13, 49, 50], and an IoT intrusion
detection [44,47,48,54] as summarized in Tab. 2. Verification
of the effectiveness of FLAME against state-of-the-art attacks
in comparison to existing defenses (cf. Tab. 3 and Tab. 4) are
conducted on these three datasets in the mentioned application
scenarios. Experiments for evaluating specific performance
aspects of FLAME are performed on the IoT dataset as it
represents a very diverse and real-world setting with clear

1424

31st USENIX Security Symposium

Table 2: Datasets used in our evaluations.
Application
WP
NIDS
IC

Datasets
Reddit
IoT-Traffic
CIFAR-10
MNIST
Tiny-ImageNet

#Records
20.6M
65.6M
60k
70k
120k

Model
LSTM
GRU
ResNet-18 Light
CNN
ResNet-18

#params
∼20M
∼507k
∼2.7M
∼431k
∼11M

security implications.
Evaluation Metrics. We consider a set of metrics for evaluating the effectiveness of backdoor attack and defense techniques as follows: BA - Backdoor Accuracy indicates the
accuracy of the model in the backdoor task, i.e., it is the fraction of the trigger set for which the model provides the wrong
outputs as chosen by the adversary. The adversary aims to
maximize BA, while an effective defense prevents the adversary from increasing it. MA - Main Task Accuracy indicates
the accuracy of a model in its main (benign) task. It denotes
the fraction of benign inputs for which the system provides
correct predictions. The adversary aims at minimizing the
effect on MA to reduce the chance of being detected. The
defense system should not negatively impact MA. TPR - True
Positive Rate indicates how well the defense identifies poisoned models, i.e., the ratio of the number of models correctly
classified as poisoned (True Positives - TP) to the total numTP
ber of models being classified as poisoned: TPR = T P+FP
,
where FP is False Positives indicating the number of benign
clients that are wrongly classified as malicious. TNR - True
Negative Rate indicates the ratio of the number of models
correctly classified as benign (True Negatives - TN) to the
TN
total number of benign models: TNR = T N+FN
, where FN is
False Negatives indicating the number of malicious clients
that are wrongly classified as benign.

7

Experimental Results

In this section, we evaluate FLAME against backdoor attacks
in the literature (§7.1) and demonstrate that our defense mechanism is resilient to adaptive attacks (§7.2). In addition, we
show the effectiveness of each of FLAME’s components in
§B and FLAME overhead in §D. Finally, we evaluate the
impact of the number of clients (§7.3) as well as the degree
of non-IID data (§7.4).

7.1

Preventing Backdoor Attacks

Effectiveness of FLAME. We evaluate FLAME against
the state-of-the-art backdoor attacks called constrain-andscale [7], DBA [59], PGD and Edge-Case [57] and an untargeted poisoning attack [20] (cf. §F) using the same attack
settings as in the original works with multiple datasets. The
results are shown in Tab. 3. FLAME completely mitigates the
constrain-and-scale attack (BA = 0%) for all datasets. Moreover, our defense does not affect the Main Task Accuracy
(MA) of the system as MA reduces by less than 0.4% in all
experiments. The DBA attack as well as the Edge-Case attack [57] are also successfully mitigated (BA = 3.2%/4.0%).
Further, FLAME is also effective against PGD attacks (BA =

USENIX Association

Table 3: Effectiveness of FLAME against state-of-the-art
attacks for the respective dataset, in terms of Backdoor Accuracy (BA) and Main Task Accuracy (MA). All metric values
are reported as percentages.
Dataset

Attack
Constrain-and-scale [7]
DBA [59]
Edge-Case [57]
PGD [57]
Untargeted Poisoning [20]

Reddit
CIFAR-10
IoT-Traffic
CIFAR-10
CIFAR-10
CIFAR-10
CIFAR-10

No Defense
BA
MA
100
22.6
81.9
89.8
100.0
100.0
93.8
57.4
42.8
84.3
56.1
68.8
46.72

FLAME
BA
MA
0
22.3
0
91.9
0
99.8
3.2
76.2
4.0
79.3
0.5
65.1
91.31

Table 4: Effectiveness of FLAME in comparison to state-ofthe-art defenses for the constrain-and-scale attack on three
datasets, in terms of Backdoor Accuracy (BA) and Main Task
Accuracy (MA). All values are percentages.
Defenses
Benign Setting
No defense
Krum [9]
FoolsGold [22]
Auror [51]
AFA [42]
DP [18]
Median [60]
FLAME

Reddit
BA
MA
22.7
100.0
22.6
100.0
9.6
0.0
22.5
100.0
22.5
100.0
22.4
14.0
18.9
0.0
22.0
0.0
22.3

CIFAR-10
BA
MA
92.2
81.9
89.8
100.0
56.7
100.0
52.3
100.0
26.1
0.0
91.7
0.0
78.9
0.0
50.1
0.0
91.9

IoT-Traffic
BA
MA
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
84.0
100.0
99.2
100.0
96.6
100.0
87.4
14.8
82.3
0.0
87.7
0.0
99.8

0.5 %). It should be noted that suggesting words is a quite
challenging task, causing the MA even without attack to be
only 22.7%, aligned with previous work [7].
We extend our evaluation to various backdoors on three
datasets. For NIDS, we evaluate 13 different backdoors (Mirai
malware attacks) and 24 device types (78 IoT devices). The
results show that FLAME is able to mitigate all backdoor
attacks completely while achieving a high MA=99.8%. We
evaluate 5 different word backdoors for WP, and 90 different image backdoors for IC, which change the output of a
whole class to another class. In all cases, FLAME successfully mitigates the attack while still preserving the MA.
Comparison to existing defenses. We compare FLAME
to existing defenses: Krum [9], FoolsGold [22], Auror [51],
Adaptive Federated Averaging (AFA) [42], Median [60] and a
generalized differential privacy (DP) approach [7, 40]. Tab. 4
shows that FLAME is effective for all 3 datasets, while previous works either fail to mitigate backdoors or reduce the
main task accuracy. Krum, FoolsGold, Auror, and AFA do not
effectively remove poisoned models and BA often remains
at 100%. Also, some defenses make the attack even more
successful than without defense. Since they remove many
benign updates (cf. §B) but fail to remove a sufficient number
of poisoned updates, these defenses increase the PMR and,
therefore, also the impact of the attack. Some defenses, e.g.,
Krum [9], Auror [51] or AFA [42] are not able to handle
non-iid data scenarios like Reddit. In contrast, FoolsGold is
only effective on the Reddit dataset (TPR = 100%) because
it works well on highly non-independent and identically dis-

USENIX Association

tributed (non-IID) data (cf. §9). Similarly, AFA only mitigates
backdoors on the CIFAR-10 dataset since the data are highly
IID (each client is assigned a random set of images) such that
the benign models share similar distances to the global model
(cf. §9). Additionally, the model’s MA is negatively impacted.
The DP-based defense is effective, but it significantly reduces
MA. For example, it performs best on the CIFAR-10 dataset
with BA = 0, but MA decreases to 78.9% while FLAME increases MA to 91.9% which is close to the benign setting (no
attacks), where MA = 92.2%.
Effectiveness of FLAME’s Components. Further, we have
also conducted an extensive evaluation of the effectiveness of
each of FLAME’s components. Due to space limitations, we
would like to refer to §B for the details.

7.2

Resilience to Adaptive Attacks

Given sufficient knowledge about FLAME, an adversary may
seek to use adaptive attacks to bypass the defense components.
In this section, we analyze such attack scenarios and strategies
including changing the injection strategy, model alignment,
and model obfuscation.
Changing the Injection Strategy. The adversary A may attempt to inject several backdoors simultaneously to execute
different attacks on the system in parallel or to circumvent the
clustering defense (cf. §2.2). FLAME is also effective against
such attacks (cf. Fig. 5). To further investigate the resilience of
FLAME against such attacks, we conduct two experiments:
1) assigning different backdoors to malicious clients and 2)
letting each malicious client inject several backdoors. To
ensure that each backdoor is injected by a sufficient number
of clients, we increased the PMR for this experiment. We
conducted these experiments with n = 100 clients of which
k = 40 are malicious on the IoT-Traffic dataset with each type
of Mirai attack representing a backdoor. First, we evaluate
FLAME for 0, 1, 2, 4, and 8 backdoors, meaning that the number of malicious clients for each backdoor is 0, 40, 20, 10, and
5. Our experimental results show that our approach is effective in mitigating the attacks as BA = 0% ± 0.0% in all cases,
with TPR = 95.2% ± 0.0%, and TNR = 100.0% ± 0.0%. For
the second experiment, 4 backdoors are injected by each of
the 40 malicious clients. Also, in this case, the results show
that FLAME can completely mitigate the backdoors.
Model Alignment. Using the same attack parameter values,
i.e., PDR (cf. §2.2), for all malicious clients can result in high
distances between benign and poisoned models. Those high
distances can be illustrated as a gap between poisoned and benign models, s.t. the clustering can separate them. Therefore,
a sophisticated adversary can generate models that bridge the
gap between them such that they are merged to the same cluster in our clustering. We evaluate this attack on the IoT-Traffic
dataset for k = 80 malicious clients and n = 200 clients in
total. To remove the gap, each malicious client is assigned a
random amount of malicious data, i.e., a random PDR ranging
from 5% to 20%. As Tab. 5 shows, when we apply model

31st USENIX Security Symposium

1425

TNR
33.04
33.33

Effect of Number of Clients

Impact of Number of Malicious Clients. We assume that
the number of benign clients is more than half of all clients
(cf. §2.2) and our clustering is only expected to be successful
when PMR = nk < 50% (cf. §4.3.1). We evaluate FLAME for
different PMR values. Figure 7 shows how BA, TPR, and TNR
change in the IC, NIDS, and WP applications for PMR values
from 25% to 60%. It shows that FLAME is only effective
if PMR < 50% so that only benign clients are admitted to
the model aggregation (TNR = 100%) and thus BA = 0%.
However, if PMR > 50%, FLAME fails to mitigate the attack
because the majority of poisoned models will be included
resulting in low TNR. Interestingly, FLAME accepted all
models for PMR = 50% (TPR = 0% and TNR = 100%). For
the IC application, since the IC data are non-IID, poisoned
models are not similar. Therefore, some poisoned models
were excluded from the cluster resulting in a high TPR even
for PMRs higher than 50%. However, the majority of poisoned
models were selected resulting in the drop in the TNR.
Varying number of clients in different training rounds.
100%

100%

TNR
TPR
BA

50%

0%

50%

100%

TNR
TPR
BA

0%
30
40
50
60
Poisoned Model Rate (PMR)

(a) IC

TNR
TPR
BA

50%

0%
30
40
50
60
Poisoned Model Rate (PMR)

(b) NIDS

30
40
50
60
Poisoned Model Rate (PMR)

(c) WP

Figure 7: Impact of the poisoned model rate PMR = nk on the
evaluation metrics. PMR is the fraction of malicious clients k
per total clients n.

1426

31st USENIX Security Symposium

80

60%

60
TPR FLAME
TNR FLAME

40%

BA FLAME
BA No Defense

PMR
#clients

40

20%

20

0%

filtering only, our clustering component cannot identify the
malicious clients well (TPR = 0%), resulting in BA = 100%.
However, when we apply FLAME, although TPR remains
low (5.68%) FLAME still mitigates the attack successfully
(BA reduces from 100% to 0%). This can be explained by the
fact that when the adversary A tunes malicious updates to be
close to the benign ones, the attack’s impact is reduced and
consequently averaged out by our noising component.
Model Obfuscation. A can add noise to the poisoned models
to make them difficult to detect. However, our evaluation
of such an attack on the IoT-Traffic dataset shows that this
strategy is not effective. We evaluate different noise levels to
determine a suitable standard deviation for the noise. Thereby,
we observe that a noise level of 0.034 causes the models’
cosine distances in clustering to change without significantly
impacting BA. However, FLAME can still efficiently defend
this attack: BA remains at 0% and MA at 100%.

7.3

100

80%

Number of Clients

TPR
0.0
5.68

100%

0
2

4

6
Rounds

8

10

(a) Image Classification
100%

100

80%

80

60%

60
TPR FLAME
TNR FLAME

40%

BA FLAME
BA No Defense

PMR
#clients

40

20%

20

0%

Number of Clients

MA
91.98
100.0

Value of Metrice

Model Filtering
FLAME

BA
100.0
0.0

Value of Metrice

Table 5: Resilience to model alignment attacks in terms of
Backdoor Accuracy (BA), Main Task Accuracy (MA), True
Positive Rate (TPR), True Negative Rate (TNR) in percent.

0
2

4

6
Rounds

8

10

(b) Network Intrusion Detection

Figure 8: Impact of the number of clients on FLAME
In general, FLAME is a round-independent defense, i.e., it
does not use information from previous rounds such as which
clients were excluded in which rounds. Therefore, FLAME
will not be affected if the number of clients or number of
malicious clients varies as long as the majority of clients
remain benign. To demonstrate this, we simulate realistic scenarios in which clients can join and drop out dynamically.
We conducted an experiment where during each round, the
total number of available clients is randomly selected. As the
result, the number of malicious clients will also be random.
In this experiment, we used a population of 100 clients in
total, out of which 25 are malicious. In each round, a random number (from 60 to 90) of clients are selected, so that
the fraction of malicious clients (PMR) varies in each round.
Figure 8 shows the experimental results. One can see that
the proportion of malicious clients (PMR) does not affect the
effectiveness of FLAME, i.e., the backdoor is completely removed (BA = 0%) in every round. Since all poisoned models
are detected, their negative effect on the aggregated model
is removed. Therefore, the MA with FLAME is better than
the one without defense, and is almost always 100 % aligned
with the results in Tab. 4.

7.4

Impact of the Degree of non-IID Data

Since clustering is based on measuring differences between
benign and malicious updates, the distribution of data among
clients might affect our defense. We conduct two experiments
for both Constrain-and-scale and Edge-Case PGD on the
CIFAR-10 dataset. For Reddit and IoT datasets, changing the
degree of non-IID data is not meaningful since the data have a
natural distribution as every client obtains data from different
Reddit users or traffic chunks from different IoT devices.
Following previous works [20,57], we vary the degree of nonIID data DegnIID by changing the fraction of images belonging
to a specific class assigned to clients. In particular, we divide
the clients into 10 groups corresponding to the 10 classes of

USENIX Association

Value in Percentage

Arithmetic
shares

100%

〈𝑋〉𝑖𝐴

50%

∗
𝐺𝑡−1
BA No Defense
MA No Defense

BA FLAME
MA FLAME

TPR FLAME
TNR FLAME

Global
model

0%
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

DegnIID

(a) Constrain-and-scale

(b) Edge-Case PGD

Figure 9: Impact of degree of non-IID data on FLAME for
constrain-and-scale using the DegnIID and for the Edge-Case
PGD attack using the α parameter of the Dirichlet distribution.
CIFAR-10. The clients of each group are assigned a fixed
fraction of DegnIID of the images from its designated image
class, while the rest of the images will be assigned to it at
random. Consequently, the data distribution is random, i.e.,
completely IID if DegnIID = 0% (all images are randomly
assigned) and completely non-IID if DegnIID = 100% (a client
only gets images from its designated class).
Figure 9a shows the evaluation results for the constrainand-scale attacks. Although FLAME does not detect the poisoned models for very non-IID scenarios, it still mitigates the
attack as the BA remains 0% for all values of DegnIID . For low
DegnIID , FLAME effectively identifies the poisoned models
(T NR = 100%) and the MA remains on almost the same level
as without defense. As shown in Fig. 9b, FLAME also mitigates the Edge-Case PGD attack effectively for all α values of
the Dirichlet distribution and the MA also stays on the same
level as without defense. However, since not all poisoned
models are detected, a higher σ is determined dynamically
to mitigate the constrain-and-scale backdoor, resulting in a
slightly reduced MA for DegnIID ≥ 0.7 (MA is 91.9% for
DegnIID = 0.6, and is reduced to 91.0% for DegnIID = 1.0).
Note that Fig. 9 shows the evaluation results in a training
round t where the global model Gt is close to convergence [7],
thus even though the TNR decreases with a large value of
DegnIID , the drop of MA with FLAME is not substantial.

8

Client 𝑖

Dynamic 〈𝑋〉
Clustering
STPC

𝐴

𝐵

〈𝑋〉𝐵𝑖

Aggregator A
Adaptive 𝐺𝑡
Clipping
STPC

Dynamic 〈𝑋〉 Adaptive
Clustering
Clipping
External Server B

Adaptive
Noising

𝐺𝑡∗
Updated
global model

Figure 10: Overview of private FLAME in round t using
Secure-Two-Party Computation (STPC).
Therefore, enhanced privacy protection for FL is needed that
prohibits access to the local model updates.
Adversary Model (privacy). In this adversary type, A s attempts to infer sensitive information about clients’ data Di
from their model updates Wi [23, 41, 46, 52] by maximizing
the information φi = I NFER(Wi ) that A s gains about the data
Di of client i by inferring from its corresponding model Wi .
Deficiencies of existing defenses. Generally, there are two approaches to protect the privacy of clients’ data: differential privacy (DP; [18]) and cryptographic techniques such as homomorphic encryption [24] or multi-party computation [14]. DP
is a statistical approach that can be efficiently implemented,
but it can only offer high privacy protection at the cost of
a significant loss in accuracy due to the noise added to the
models [6, 61]. In contrast, cryptographic techniques provide
strong privacy guarantees as well as high accuracy at the cost
of reduced efficiency.
Private FLAME. To securely implement FLAME using
STPC, we use an optimized combination of three prominent STPC techniques as implemented with state-of-the-art
optimizations in the ABY framework [14]. Fig. 10 shows
an overview of private FLAME. It involves n clients and
two non-colluding servers, called aggregator A and external
server B. Each client i ∈ {1, ..., n} splits the parameters of its
local update Wi into two Arithmetic shares ⟨X⟩Ai and ⟨X⟩Bi ,
such that Wi = ⟨X⟩Ai + ⟨X⟩Bi , and sends ⟨X⟩Ai to A and ⟨X⟩Bi
to B. A and B then privately compute the new global model
via STPC. We co-design the distance calculation, clustering,
adaptive clipping, and aggregation of FLAME (cf. Alg. 1)
of FLAME as efficient STPC protocols.To further improve
performance, we approximate HDBSCAN with the simpler
DBSCAN [10] to avoid the construction of the minimal spanning tree in HDBSCAN as it is very expensive to realize with
STPC. See §G for more details on private FLAME evaluation
of its accuracy and performance.

Privacy-preserving Federated Learning

A number of attacks on FL have been proposed that aim to
infer from parameters of a model the presence of a specific
training sample in the training dataset (membership inference
attacks) [41, 46, 52], properties of training samples (property
inference attacks) [23,41], try to assess the proportion of samples of a specific class in the data (distribution estimation
attacks) [58]. Inference attacks by the aggregator A s are significantly stronger, as A s has access to the local models [43]
and can also link gained information to a specific user, while
the global model anonymizes the individual contributions.

USENIX Association

9

Related Work

In general, existing backdoor defenses can roughly be divided
into two main categories. The first one aims to distinguish
malicious updates and benign updates by 1) clustering model
updates [9,15,22,29,33,34,51], 2) changing aggregation rules
[25, 60], and 3) using root dataset [4]. The second category is
based on differential privacy techniques [7, 56]. Next, we will
discuss these points in detail.
Clustering model updates. Several backdoor defenses, such
as Krum [9], AFA [42], and Auror [51], aim at separat-

31st USENIX Security Symposium

1427

ing benign and malicious model updates. However, they
only work under specific assumptions about the underlying data distributions, e.g., Auror and Krum assume that
data of benign clients are iid. In contrast, FoolsGold and
AFA [42] assume that benign data are non-iid. In addition,
FoolsGold assumes that manipulated data are iid. As a result, these defenses are only effective under specific circumstances (cf. §7.1) and cannot handle the simultaneous injection of multiple backdoors (cf. §4.3.1). Moreover, such
defenses cannot detect stealthy attacks, e.g., where the adversary constrains their poisoned updates within benign update distribution such as Constrain-and-scale attacks [7]. In
contrast, FLAME does not make any assumption about the
data distribution, clipping, and noising components can also
mitigate stealthy attacks, and FLAME can defend against
injection of multiple backdoors (cf. §4.3.1).
Changing aggregation rules. Instead of using FedAvg [38],
Yin et al. [60] and Guerraoui et al. [25] propose using the
median parameters from all local models as the global model
parameters, i.e., Gt = M EDIAN(W1t , . . . ,Wnt ). However, the
adversary can bypass it by injecting stealthy models like W3′
(cf. Fig. 2), in which the parameters of poisoned model will
be selected to be incorporated into the global model. Further,
our evaluation in §7.1 shows that Median also reduces the
performance of the model significantly.
Using root data. Although FLTrust [12] can defend against
byzantine clients (with arbitrary behavior) and detect poisoning attacks including backdoors, it requires the aggregator to
have access to a benign root dataset. Baffle [4] utilizes clients
using their own data to evaluate the performance of the aggregated model to detect backdoors. However, this approach
has two limitations, e.g., (i) the backdoor triggers are only
known to the attacker, i.e., one cannot ensure that the benign
clients would have such trigger data to activate the backdoor,
and (ii) Baffle does not work in a non-IID data scenario with
a small number of clients as clients cannot distinguish deficits
in model performance due to the backdoor from lack of data.
Differential Privacy-based approaches. Clipping and noising are known techniques to achieve differential privacy
(DP) [18]. However, directly applying these techniques to
defend against backdoor attacks is not effective because
they significantly decrease the Main Task Accuracy (§7.1)
[7]. FLAME tackles this by i) identifying and filtering out
potential poisoned models that have a high attack impact
(cf. §4.3.1), and ii) eliminating the residual poison with an
appropriate adaptive clipping bound and noise level, such that
the Main Task Accuracy is retained (cf. §4.3.2).

10

Conclusion

In this paper, we introduce FLAME, a resilient aggregation
framework for FL that eliminates the impact of backdoor attacks while maintaining the performance of the aggregated
model on the main task. We propose a method to approximate
the amount of noise that needs to be injected into the global

1428

31st USENIX Security Symposium

model to neutralize backdoors. Furthermore, in combination
with our dynamic clustering and adaptive clipping, FLAME
can significantly reduce the noise scale for backdoor removal
and thus preserve the benign performance of the global model.
In addition, we design, implement, and benchmark efficient secure two-party computation protocols for FLAME to ensure
the privacy of clients’ training data and to impede inference
attacks on client updates.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) SFB-1119 CROSSING/236615297, the
European Research Council (ERC, grant No. 850990 PSOTI),
the EU H2020 project SPATIAL (grant No. 101021808),
GRK 2050 Privacy & Trust/251805230, HMWK within
ATHENE project, NSF-TrustHub (grant No. 1649423), SRCAuto (2019-AU-2899), Huawei OpenS3 Lab, and Intel Private
AI Collaborative Research Center. We thank the anonymous
reviewers and the shepherd, Neil Gong, for constructive reviews and comments.

References
[1] Reddit dataset, 2017. https://bigquery.cloud.google.
com/dataset/fh-bigquery:reddit_comments.
[2] Pytorch, 2019. https://pytorch.org.
[3] Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H. Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. Deep learning
with differential privacy. In CCS. ACM, 2016.
[4] Sebastien Andreina, Giorgia Azzurra Marson, Helen Möllering, and Ghassan Karame. BaFFLe: Backdoor Detection via
Feedback-based Federated Learning. In ICDCS, 2021.
[5] Manos Antonakakis, Tim April, Michael Bailey, Matt Bernhard, Elie Bursztein, Jaime Cochran, Zakir Durumeric, J. Alex
Halderman, Luca Invernizzi, Michalis Kallitsis, Deepak Kumar, Chaz Lever, Zane Ma, Joshua Mason, Damian Menscher,
Chad Seaman, Nick Sullivan, Kurt Thomas, and Yi Zhou. Understanding the Mirai Botnet. In USENIX Security, 2017.
[6] Yoshinori Aono, Takuya Hayashi, Lihua Wang, and Shiho Moriai. Privacy-preserving Deep Learning via Additively Homomorphic Encryption. In TIFS, 2017.
[7] Eugene Bagdasaryan, Andreas Veit, Yiqing Hua, Deborah Estrin, and Vitaly Shmatikov. How To Backdoor Federated Learning. In AISTATS, 2020.
[8] Moran Baruch, Gilad Baruch, and Yoav Goldberg. A Little
Is Enough: Circumventing Defenses For Distributed Learning.
In NIPS, 2019.
[9] Peva Blanchard, El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and
Julien Stainer. Machine Learning with Adversaries: Byzantine
Tolerant Gradient Descent. In NIPS, 2017.
[10] Beyza Bozdemir, Sébastien Canard, Orhan Ermis, Helen
Möllering, Melek Önen, and Thomas Schneider. Privacypreserving density-based clustering. In ASIACCS, 2021.

USENIX Association

[11] Ricardo J. G. B. Campello, Davoud Moulavi, and Joerg Sander.
Density-Based Clustering Based on Hierarchical Density Estimates. In Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, 2013.

[27] Stephen Herwig, Katura Harvey, George Hughey, Richard
Roberts, and Dave Levin. Measurement and Analysis of Hajime, a Peer-to-Peer IoT Botnet. In NDSS, 2019.

[12] Xiaoyu Cao, Minghong Fang, Jia Liu, and Neil Zhenqiang
Gong. Fltrust: Byzantine-robust federated learning via trust
bootstrapping. In NDSS, 2021.

[28] Li Huang, Yifeng Yin, Zeng Fu, Shifa Zhang, Hao Deng,
and Dianbo Liu. LoAdaBoost: Loss-Based AdaBoost Federated Machine Learning on medical Data.
In arXiv
preprint:1811.12629, 2018.

[13] Trishul Chilimbi, Yutaka Suzue, Johnson Apacible, and Karthik
Kalyanaraman. Project Adam: Building an Efficient and Scalable Deep Learning Training System. In USENIX Operating
Systems Design and Implementation, 2014.

[29] Youssef Khazbak, Tianxiang Tan, and Guohong Cao. Mlguard:
Mitigating poisoning attacks in privacy preserving distributed
collaborative learning. In International Conference on Computer Communications and Networks (ICCCN). IEEE, 2020.

[14] Daniel Demmler, Thomas Schneider, and Michael Zohner.
ABY - A Framework for Efficient Mixed-Protocol Secure TwoParty Computation. In NDSS, 2015.

[30] Constantinos Kolias, Georgios Kambourakis, Angelos Stavrou,
and Jeffrey Voas. DDoS in the IoT: Mirai and Other Botnets.
In IEEE Computer, 2017.

[15] Ilias Diakonikolas, Gautam Kamath, Daniel Kane, Jerry Li,
Jacob Steinhardt, and Alistair Stewart. Sever: A robust metaalgorithm for stochastic optimization. In ICML, 2019.

[31] Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning Multiple
Layers of Features from Tiny Images. Technical report, 2009.

[16] Rohan Doshi, Noah Apthorpe, and Nick Feamster. Machine
Learning DDoS Detection for Consumer Internet of Things
Devices. In arXiv preprint:1804.04159, 2018.
[17] Min Du, Ruoxi Jia, and Dawn Song. Robust anomaly detection
and backdoor attack detection via differential privacy. In ICLR,
2020.
[18] Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth. The Algorithmic Foundations of Differential Privacy. In Foundations and Trends in
Theoretical Computer Science, 2014.
[19] Martin Ester, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Jörg Sander, Xiaowei Xu,
et al. A Density-Based Algorithm for Discovering Clusters in
Large Spatial Databases with Noise. In KDD, 1996.
[20] Minghong Fang, Xiaoyu Cao, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil Zhenqiang
Gong. Local Model Poisoning Attacks to Byzantine-Robust
Federated Learning. In USENIX Security, 2020.
[21] Hossein Fereidooni, Samuel Marchal, Markus Miettinen, Azalia Mirhoseini, Helen Möllering, Thien Duc Nguyen, Phillip
Rieger, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, Thomas Schneider, Hossein
Yalame, et al. Safelearn: secure aggregation for private federated learning. In 2021 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops
(SPW), pages 56–62. IEEE, 2021.
[22] Clement Fung, Chris JM Yoon, and Ivan Beschastnikh. The
limitations of federated learning in sybil settings. In RAID,
2020. originally published as arxiv:1808.04866.
[23] Karan Ganju, Qi Wang, Wei Yang, Carl A Gunter, and Nikita
Borisov. Property Inference Attacks on Fully Connected Neural Networks Using Permutation Invariant Representations. In
CCS, 2018.
[24] Craig Gentry. A Fully Homomorphic Encryption Scheme. PhD
thesis, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, 2009.
[25] Rachid Guerraoui, Sébastien Rouault, et al. The hidden vulnerability of distributed learning in byzantium. In ICML. PMLR,
2018.
[26] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. In CVPR,
2016.

USENIX Association

[32] Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner. Gradient-based
learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the
IEEE, 86(11), 1998.
[33] Suyi Li, Yong Cheng, Yang Liu, Wei Wang, and Tianjian Chen.
Abnormal client behavior detection in federated learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.09933, 2019.
[34] Suyi Li, Yong Cheng, Wei Wang, Yang Liu, and Tianjian Chen.
Learning to detect malicious clients for robust federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.00211, 2020.
[35] Yujun Lin, Song Han, Huizi Mao, Yu Wang, and William J.
Dally. Deep Gradient Compression: Reducing the Communication Bandwidth for Distributed Training. In ICLR, 2018.
[36] Leland McInnes and John Healy. Accelerated hierarchical
density based clustering. In Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW),
2017 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2017.
[37] Leland McInnes, John Healy, and Steve Astels. hdbscan: Hierarchical density based clustering. The Journal of Open Source
Software, 2(11):205, 2017.
[38] Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Agüera y Arcas. Communication-Efficient
Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data. In AISTATS, 2017.
[39] Brendan McMahan and Daniel Ramage. Federated learning:
Collaborative Machine Learning without Centralized Training
Data. Google AI, 2017.
[40] H. Brendan McMahan, Daniel Ramage, Kunal Talwar, and
Li Zhang. Learning Differentially Private Language Models
Without Losing Accuracy. In ICLR, 2018.
[41] Luca Melis, Congzheng Song, Emiliano De Cristofaro, and
Vitaly Shmatikov. Exploiting Unintended Feature Leakage in
Collaborative Learning. In IEEE S&P, 2019.
[42] Luis Muñoz-González, Kenneth T. Co, and Emil C. Lupu.
Byzantine-Robust Federated Machine Learning through Adaptive Model Averaging. In arXiv preprint:1909.05125, 2019.
[43] M. Nasr, R. Shokri, and A. Houmansadr. Comprehensive
privacy analysis of deep learning: Passive and active white-box
inference attacks against centralized and federated learning. In
IEEE S&P, 2019.

31st USENIX Security Symposium

1429

[44] Thien Duc Nguyen, Samuel Marchal, Markus Miettinen, Hossein Fereidooni, N. Asokan, and Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. DÏoT:
A Federated Self-learning Anomaly Detection System for IoT.
In ICDCS, 2019.
[45] Thien Duc Nguyen, Phillip Rieger, Markus Miettinen, and
Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. Poisoning Attacks on Federated
Learning-Based IoT Intrusion Detection System. In Workshop on Decentralized IoT Systems and Security, 2020.
[46] Apostolos Pyrgelis, Carmela Troncoso, and Emiliano
De Cristofaro. Knock Knock, Who’s There? Membership
Inference on Aggregate Location Data. In NDSS, 2018.
[47] Jianji Ren, Haichao Wang, Tingting Hou, Shuai Zheng, and
Chaosheng Tang. Federated Learning-Based Computation Offloading Optimization in Edge Computing-Supported Internet
of Things. In IEEE Access, 2019.
[48] Sumudu Samarakoon, Mehdi Bennis, Walid Saad, and Merouane Debbah. Federated Learning for Ultra-Reliable LowLatency V2V Communications. In GLOBCOM, 2018.
[49] Micah Sheller, Anthony Reina, Brandon Edwards, Jason Martin, and Spyridon Bakas. Federated Learning for Medical
Imaging. In Intel AI, 2018.
[50] Micah Sheller, Anthony Reina, Brandon Edwards, Jason Martin, and Spyridon Bakas. Multi-Institutional Deep Learning
Modeling Without Sharing Patient Data: A Feasibility Study
on Brain Tumor Segmentation. In Brain Lesion Workshop,
2018.
[51] Shiqi Shen, Shruti Tople, and Prateek Saxena. Auror: Defending Against Poisoning Attacks in Collaborative Deep Learning
Systems. In ACSAC, 2016.
[52] Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly
Shmatikov. Membership Inference Attacks Against Machine
Learning Models. In IEEE S&P, 2017.
[53] Arunan Sivanathan, Hassan Habibi Gharakheili, Franco Loi,
Adam Radford, Chamith Wijenayake, Arun Vishwanath, and
Vijay Sivaraman. Classifying IoT Devices in Smart Environments Using Network Traffic Characteristics. In TMC, 2018.
[54] Virginia Smith, Chao-Kai Chiang, Maziar Sanjabi, and
Ameet S Talwalkar. Federated Multi-Task Learning. In NIPS,
2017.
[55] Saleh Soltan, Prateek Mittal, and Vincent Poor. BlackIoT: IoT
Botnet of High Wattage Devices Can Disrupt the Power Grid.
In USENIX Security, 2018.
[56] Ziteng Sun, Peter Kairouz, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and
H Brendan McMahan. Can you really backdoor federated
learning? arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.07963, 2019.
[57] Hongyi Wang, Kartik Sreenivasan, Shashank Rajput, Harit
Vishwakarma, Saurabh Agarwal, Jy-yong Sohn, Kangwook
Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Attack of the tails: Yes, you
really can backdoor federated learning. In NeurIPS, 2020.
[58] Lixu Wang, Shichao Xu, Xiao Wang, and Qi Zhu. Eavesdrop
the Composition Proportion of Training Labels in Federated
Learning. In arXiv preprint:1910.06044, 2019.
[59] Chulin Xie, Keli Huang, Pin-Yu Chen, and Bo Li. DBA: Distributed Backdoor Attacks against Federated Learning. In
ICLR, 2020.

1430

31st USENIX Security Symposium

[60] Dong Yin, Yudong Chen, Ramchandran Kannan, and Peter
Bartlett. Byzantine-robust distributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates. In ICML. PMLR, 2018.
[61] Chengliang Zhang, Suyi Li, Junzhe Xia, Wei Wang, Feng Yan,
and Yang Liu. BatchCrypt: Efficient Homomorphic Encryption
for Cross-Silo Federated Learning. In USENIX ATC, 2020.

A

Datasets and Learning Configurations

Word Prediction (WP). We use the Reddit dataset of November 2017 [1] with the same settings as state-of-the-art works
[7, 38, 40] for comparability. In particular, each user in the
dataset with at least 150 posts and not more than 500 posts is
considered as a client. This results in 80 000 clients’ datasets
with sizes between 298 and 32 660 words.
The model consists of two LSTM layers and a linear output
layer [7, 38]. To be comparable to the attack setting in [7],
we evaluate FLAME on five different backdoors, each with
a different trigger sentence corresponding to a chosen output.
Image Classification (IC). For image classification, we use
mainly the CIFAR-10 dataset [31], a standard benchmark
dataset for image classification, in particular for FL [38] and
backdoor attacks [7, 8, 42]. It consists of 60 000 images of
10 different classes. The adversary aims at changing the predicted label of one class of images to another class of images.
We use a lightweight version of the ResNet18 model [26] with
4 convolutional layers with max-pooling and batch normalization [7]. The experimental setup consists of 100 clients and
uses a PMR of 20%. In addition to the CIFAR-10 dataset, we
also evaluate FLAME’s effectiveness on two further datasets
for image classification. The MNIST dataset consists of 70 000
handwritten digits [32]. The learning task is to classify images
to identify digits. The adversary poisons the model by mislabeling labels of digit images before using it for training [51].
We use a convolutional neural network (CNN) with 431000
parameters. The Tiny-ImageNet 3 consists of 200 classes and
each class has 500 training images, 50 validation images, and
50 test images. We used ResNet18 [26] model.
Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS). We test
backdoor attacks on IoT anomaly-based intrusion detection systems that often represent critical security applications [5, 16, 27, 30, 44, 45, 55]. Here, the adversary aims at
causing incorrect classification of anomalous traffic patterns,
e.g., generated by IoT malware, as benign patterns. Based
on the FL anomaly detection system DÏoT [44], we use
three datasets called DIoT-Benign, DIoT-Attack, and UNSWBenign [44,53] from real-world home and office deployments
(four homes and two offices located in Germany and Australia). DIoT-Attack contains the traffic of 5 anomalously
behaving IoT devices, infected by the Mirai malware [44].
Moreover, we collected a fourth IoT dataset containing communication data from 24 typical IoT devices (including IP
cameras and power plugs) in three different smart home settings and an office setting. Following [44], we extracted
3 https://tiny-imagenet.herokuapp.com

USENIX Association

Backdoor Accuracy (BA)

Krum
FoolsGold
Auror
AFA
FLAME

Reddit
TPR
TNR
9.1
0.0
100.0
100.0
0.0
90.0
0.0
88.9
22.2
100.0

100%
75%
No Defense
S = 10
S =1

50%
25%

S = 0.5

0%

CIFAR-10
TPR
TNR
8.2
0.0
0.0
90.0
0.0
90.0
100.0
100.0
23.8
86.2
Main Task Accuracy (MA)

Defenses

80%
60%

20%

S = med
S = 1.5 med

50%
25%
0%

(b) MA for static bound
Main Task Accuracy (MA)

Backdoor Accuracy (BA)

S = 0.5 med

S = 0.5

0%
20%
40%
60%
Poisoned Data Rate (PDR)

(a) BA for static bound

75%

No Defense
S = 10
S =1

40%

20%
40%
60%
Poisoned Data Rate (PDR)

100%

IoT-Traffic
TPR
TNR
24.2
0.0
32.7
84.4
0.0
70.2
4.5
69.2
59.5 100.0

86%
85%
84%

S = 0.5 med

83%

S = med
S = 1.5 med

82%

20%
40%
60%
Poisoned Data Rate (PDR)

20%
40%
60%
Poisoned Data Rate (PDR)

(c) BA for dynamic bound

(d) MA for dynamic bound

Figure 11: Effectiveness of FLAME’s clipping bound in
terms of Backdoor Accuracy (BA) and Main Task Accuracy
(MA). S is the clipping bound and med the L2 -norm median.
device-type-specific datasets capturing the devices’ communication behavior. We simulate the FL setup by splitting
each device type’s dataset among several clients (from 20
to 200). Each client has a training dataset corresponding to
three hours of traffic measurements containing samples of
roughly 2 000-3 000 communication packets. The learning
model consists of 2 GRU layers and a fully connected layer.

B Effectiveness of FLAME’s Components
B.1 Effectiveness of the Clustering Component
We show the results for the clustering component in Tab. 6.
As shown there, our filtering achieves TNR = 100% for the
Reddit and IoT-Traffic datasets, i.e., FLAME only selects
benign models in this attack setting. Recall that the goal of
clustering is to filter out the poisoned models with high attack
impact, i.e., not necessarily all poisoned models (cf. §4.1).
This allows FLAME to defend backdoor attacks effectively,
even if not all poisoned models are filtered. For example,
although for the CIFAR-10 dataset in Tab. 6 the TNR is not
100 % (86.2%), the attack is still mitigated by the noising
component, such that the BA is 0 % (cf. Tab. 4).

B.2

Effectiveness of Clipping

USENIX Association

100%

BA
MA

0%
0.000

0.005
0.010
Noise Level Factors

(a) Image Classification

Value of Metric

Table 6: Effectiveness of the clustering component, in terms
of True Positive Rate (TPR) and True Negative Rate (TNR), of
FLAME in comparison to existing defenses for the constrainand-scale attack on three datasets. All values are in percentage
and the best results of the defenses are marked in bold.

100%

MA
BA

0%
0.0

0.1
0.2
Noise Level Factors

(b) Network Intrusion Detection

Figure 12: Impact of different noise level factors on the Backdoor Accuracy (BA) and Main Task Accuracy (MA).
Fig. 11 demonstrates the effectiveness of FLAME’s dynamic
clipping where S is the median of L2 -norms compared to a
static clipping bound [7] and different choices for a dynamic
clipping boundary (i.e., median, half of median, median multiplied by 1.5). The experiments are conducted for the IoTTraffic dataset, which is non-iid. Fig. 11a and Fig. 11b show
that a small static bound S = 0.5 is effective to mitigate the
attack (BA = 0%), but MA drops to 0% rendering the model
useless. Moreover, a higher static bound like S = 10 is ineffective as BA = 100% if the Poisoned Data Rate (PDR) ≥ 35%.
In contrast, FLAME’s dynamic clipping threshold performs
significantly better as BA consistently remains at 0% while
MA remains high (cf. Fig. 11c and Fig. 11d).

B.3

Effectiveness of Adding Noise

Fig. 12 shows the impact of adding noise to the intermediate
global models with respect to different noise level factors λ to
determine the standard deviation of the noise σ dynamically
based on the median L2 -norm of the updates St as σ = λSt .
As it can be seen, increasing λ reduces the BA, but it also
negatively impacts the performance of the model in the main
task (MA). Therefore, the noise level must be dynamically
tuned and combined with the other defense components to
optimize the overall success q
of the defense. The noise level
factor is determined by λ = 1ε 2ln 1.25
δ for (ε, δ)-DP. We use
standard DP parameters and set ε = 3705 for IC, ε = 395 for
the NIDS and ε = 4191 for the NLP scenario. Accordingly,
λ = 0.001 for IC and NLP, and λ = 0.01 for the NIDS scenario. The DP budget is dependent on the considered dataset
scenario. It is determined based on the median of the dataset
sizes of the clients and the size of the model used. It can thus
be empirically determined by the aggregator. Analogous to
determining the clipping boundary S (cf. 4.3.2), using the
median ensures that the used dataset size is within the range
of benign values.

C

Naïve Combination

Furthermore, we test a naïve combination of the defense components by stacking clipping and adding noise (using a fixed
clipping bound of 1.0 and a standard deviation of 0.01 as
in [7]) on top of a clustering component using K-means. However, this naïve approach still allows a BA of 51.9% and a MA
of 60.24%, compared to a BA of 0.0% and a MA of 89.87%
of FLAME in the same scenario for the CIFAR-10 dataset.
Based on our evaluations in §7.1, it becomes apparent that

31st USENIX Security Symposium

1431

FLAME’s dynamic nature goes beyond previously proposed
defenses that consist of static baseline ideas, which FLAME
significantly optimizes, extends, and automates to offer a comprehensive dynamic and private defense against sophisticated
backdoor attacks.

D

Overhead of FLAME

We evaluated FLAME for 6 different device types from the
IoT dataset. In this experiment, only benign clients participated and the model was randomly initialized. The highest
observed overhead was 4 additional rounds. In average, 1.67
additional training rounds were needed to achieve at least 99%
of the MA that was achieved without applying the defense,
i.e., FLAME does not prevent the model from converging.

E

HDBSCAN

HDBSCAN [11] is a density-based clustering technique that
classifies data samples in different clusters without predefined the maximum distance and the number of clusters. In
the following, we describe HDBSCAN in detail, following
the implementation of McInnes et al. [36, 37]. However,
we focus on the behavior of HDBSCAN for the parameters that FLAME uses, i.e., when min_cluster_size=N/2 +
1 and min_samples=1, e.g., because of the choice for
min_cluster_size we skip parts that deal with multiple
clusters. HDBSCAN first uses the given distances to build a
minimal spanning tree (MST), where the vertices represent
the individual data points and the edges are weighted by the
distances between the respective points. Then it uses the MST
to build a binary tree where the leaf nodes represent the vertices of the MST and the non-leaf nodes represent the edges of
the MST. For this, first, all vertices are considered as separate
trees (of size 1). For this, first, all vertices are considered as
separate trees (of size 1) and then, starting from the edge with
the lowest weight, iteratively the trees are merged by creating
a non-leaf-node for each edge of the MST and set the (previously not connected) subtrees containing the endpoints of the
edge as children for the new node (represented by calling the
function make_binary_tree. In the next step, HDBSCAN
collects all nodes of the binary tree as candidates, that cover
at least N/2 + 1 data points. Since only non-leaf nodes fulfill
the requirement of covering at least N/2 + 1 data points, each
cluster candidate is based on a node, representing an edge in
the MST. It uses the weight of the edge and the number of
covered points to calculate a so-called stability value. Then
HDBSCAN uses the stability value to determine the cluster
candidate with the most homogeneous density and returns this
candidate as majority cluster. Finally, it assigns the cluster
label to all data points inside this cluster and labels all points
outside of this cluster as noise.

F

Effectiveness of FLAME against untargeted
poisoning attacks

1432

31st USENIX Security Symposium

Another attack type related to backdooring is untargeted poisoning [8, 9, 20]. Unlike backdoor attacks that aim to incorporate specific backdoor functionalities, untargeted poisoning
aims at rendering the model unusable. The adversary uses
crafted local models with low Main Task Accuracy to damage the global model G. Fang at el. [20] propose such an
attack bypassing state-of-the-art defenses. Although we do
not focus on untargeted poisoning, our approach intuitively
defends it since, in principle, this attack also trade-offs attack
impact against stealthiness. To evaluate the effectiveness of
FLAME against this attack, we test the Krum-based attack
proposed by [20] on FLAME. Since [20]’s evaluation uses
image datasets, we evaluate FLAME’s resilience against it
with CIFAR-10. The evaluation results show that although
the attack significantly damages the model by reducing MA
from 92.16% to 46.72%, FLAME can successfully defend
against it and MA remains at 91.31%.

G

Performance of Private FLAME

For our implementation, we use the STPC framework
ABY [14] which implements the three sharing types, including state-of-the-art optimizations and flexible conversions and
the open-source privacy-preserving DBSCAN by Bozdemir
et al. [10]. All STPC results are averaged over 10 experiments
and run on two separate servers with Intel Core i9-7960X
CPUs with 2.8 GHz and 128 GB RAM connected over a 10
Gbit/s LAN with 0.2 ms RTT.
Approximating HDBSCAN by DBSCAN. We measure the
effect of approximating HDBSCAN by DBSCAN including
the binary search for the neighborhood parameter ε. The
results show that our approximation has a negligible loss
of accuracy. For some applications, the approximation even
performs slightly better than the standard FLAME, e.g., for
CIFAR-10, private FLAME correctly filters all poisoned models, while standard FLAME accepts a small number (TNR =
86.2%), which is still sufficient to achieve BA = 0.0%.
Runtime of Private FLAME. We evaluate the runtime in
seconds per training iteration of the cosine distance, Euclidean
distance + clipping + model aggregation, and clustering steps
of Alg. 1 in standard (without STPC) and in private FLAME
(with STPC). The results show that private FLAME causes a
significant overhead on the runtime by a factor of up to three
orders of magnitude compared to the standard (non-private)
FLAME. However, even if we consider the largest model
(Reddit) with K = 100 clients, we have a total server-side
runtime of 22 081.65 seconds (≈ 6 hours) for a training iteration with STPC. Such runtime overhead would be acceptable
to maintain privacy, especially since mobile phones, which
would be a typical type of clients in FL [38], are not always
available and connected so that there will be delays in synchronizing clients’ model updates in FL. These delays can
then also be used to run STPC. Furthermore, achieving provable privacy by using STPC may even motivate more clients
to contribute to FL in the first place and provide more data.

USENIX Association

